---
title: 'Bend-and-Break'
date: 2026-05-26
permalink: /posts/2012/08/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - birational geometry
use_math: true
---

My notes on several Bend-and-Break theorems.



This post documents a brief account of several bend-and-break theorems as I read about them. Let us fix the notational convention that we are going to use in this post. All schemes are of finite type over a field $k.$ By a variety we mean a separated, integral scheme of finite type over a field. A curve is a 1-dimensional connceted, reduced proper scheme over a field $k$, not necessarily irreducible. By a curve on a variety $X$ we mean a nonconstant morphism from a curve with smooth irreducible components to $X$, or equivalently its image in $X$. 



First let me mention a few things about morphisms that contract curves. By the famous Stein Factorization theorem, any proper morphism $f:X\to Y$ between varieties can be factorised as $X \xrightarrow{f'} Y'\xrightarrow{g} Y$ where $f'$ has connected fibers and $g$ is a finite morphism. Actually having connected fibers is a consequence of the fact that in the proof of Stein Factorisation we take $Y'=\Spec f_*\O_X$ which implies that $\O_{Y'}\cong f'_ * \O_X$. It is important to note here that the curves contracted by $f$ and $f'$ are the same.



Let us remark what happens if $f$ has connected fibers to begin with. In this case $g$ is bijective. If $k$ is a field of characteristic 0, then by generic smoothness (which holds even for non algebraically closed fields) there exists an open subset $V\subseteq Y$ such that $g\mid_{g^{-1}(V)}:g^{-1}(V)\to V$ is smooth. Since $g\mid_{g^{-1}(V)}$ is flat and $g$ is bijective, $g\mid_{g^{-1}(V)}$ is a finite bijective étale morphism, hence an isomorphism. So $g$ is a birational map. Moreover if $Y$ is normal then for any open subset $U\subseteq Y,$ $\Gamma(g^{-1}(U),\O_{Y'})=\Gamma(U,\O_Y)$ since $g$ is finite and $\Gamma(U,\O_Y)$ is integrally closed in its fraction field. Hence $g$ is an isomorphism. 

Now let us prove the following **rigidity lemma** which is crucial in most of the bend-and-break theorems.

> **Theorem.**
>  Let $X,Y,$ and $Y'$ be varieties and let $\pi: X\to Y$ and $\pi':X\to Y'$ be proper morphisms. Assume that $\pi_ * \O_X\cong \O_Y.$
> 1. If $\pi'$ contracts one fiber $\pi^{-1}(y_0)$ for some $y_0\in Y,$ there is an open neighbourhood $V$ of $y_0$ and factorisation  $ \pi'\mid_{\pi^{-1}(V)}: \pi^{-1}(V) \xrightarrow{\pi} V\to Y'.$   
> 2. If $\pi'$ contracts every fiber of $\pi$ then $\pi'$ factors through $\pi.$                            

> **Proof.**
>  1. The isomorphism $\pi_ *\O_X\cong \O_Y$ ensures that $\pi$ is surjective (and also affine) because for each $y\in Y$ choose an affine neighbourhood $\Spec R$ so that $\O_{\pi^{-1}(\Spec R)}\cong \O_X{\Spec R}$. Let Z be the image of the product morphism $g: X\xrightarrow{(\pi,\pi')} Y\times Y'$ and $p:Z\to Y$ and $p':Z\to Y'$ be the standard projections onto the first and second factors respectively. Since $\pi'$ contracts $\pi^{-1}(y_0)=g^{-1}(p^{-1}(y_0))$, $g$ also contracts the fiber. So $p^{-1}(y_0)=g(g^{-1}(p^{-1}(y_0)))$ is a point, and $p$ being proper implies that there exists an open neighbourhood $Y_0$ of $y_0$ over which the morphism $p\mid_{p^{-1}(Y_0)}:p^{-1}(Y_0)\to Y_0$ is quasi-finite by the upper semicontinuity of the fiber dimensions. It follows that $p\mid_{p^{-1}(Y_0)}:p^{-1}(Y_0)\to Y_0$ is finite because it is proper (by base change of $p$) and quasi-finite. Let $X_0=\pi^{-1}(Y_0)$ and $Z_0=p^{-1}(Y_0)$. Since $\pi$ and $p\mid_{Z_0}$ are affine, so is $g\mid_{X_0}.$ Any surjective affine morphism is injective at the level of structure sheaves. So we have $\O_Z \subset \pi_ *\O_{X_0}$ (since it is a morphism between integral schemes which is an isomorphism at the level of stalks of the generic points) and since pushforward is left exact we get
> $$ \O_{Y_0}\subset p_ *\O_{Z_0} \subset p_ * g_ * \O_{X_0}=\pi_ * \O_{X_0}=\O_{Y_0}$$
> which gives us $p_ *\O_{Z_0}=\O_{Y_0}.$ It follows that $p_0=p\mid_{Z_0}: Z_0\to Y_0$ is an isomorphism, and $\pi'\mid_{\pi^{-1}(Y_0)}=p'\circ p_0^{-1}\circ \pi\mid_{X_0}.$ 
> 2. If $\pi'$ contracts every fiber of $\pi$ then $p$ is finite and in the proof above we can take $Y_0=Y$ which gives us that $\pi'$ factors through $\pi.$ 


The above theorem lets us prove that the relative cone of curves of a morphism determines the morphism uniquely. Let $X,Y$ and $Y'$ be projective varieties and $\pi:X\to Y,$ $\pi':X\to Y'$ be morphisms with $\O_Y\cong \pi_ *\O_X.$ Let $NE(\pi)$ be contained in $NE(\pi')$ which means that every irreducible curve contracted by $\pi$ is also contracted by $\pi'.$ So every fiber of $\pi$ (since through every point in the fiber there is an irreducible curve passing through that point) is contracted by $\pi'.$ By the theorem above $\pi'=f\circ \pi$ for some morphism $f:Y\to Y'.$ We show that this morphism is unique. Let $f':Y\to Y'$ be another morphism such that $\pi'=f'\circ \pi.$ In the proof above we had $p:Z\to Y$ is an isomorphism. So $f'=p'\circ p^{-1}=f.$

Before moving to the bend-and-break theory, let us breifly mention a few things about spaces of morphisms. Given projective varieties (or more generally quasi-projective target and projective source) $X$ and $Y$ there is an algebraic variety $Mor(X,Y)$ parametrizing the morphisms from $X$ to $Y$ in the following way: There is a universal morphism $f^{univ}:Mor(X,Y)\times X\to Y$ such that for each point $t\in Mor(X,Y)$, the morphism $f^{univ}_t:X\to Y$ is the morphism cooresponding to $t$ (conversely given a morphism from $X$ to $Y$ defines a point on the space $Mor(X,Y)$), and Given a morphism $\phi: T\times X\to Y$ for some scheme $T$ there exists a unique morphism $g:T\to Mor(X,Y)$ such that $\phi$ is the pullback of $f^{univ}$ along $g.$ Now consider a closed subscheme $B$ of $X$ and a fixed morphism $h:B\to Y$. The space $Mor(X,Y;h)$ stands for the space parametrizing all morphisms from $X$ to $Y$ that restrict to $h$ on $B$. $Mor(X,Y;h)$ is the fiber of the morphsim $Mor(X,Y)$ to $Mor(B,Y)$ defined by restricting the morphisms to $B.$ It also satisfies the similar universal property.

Now let us come to the first bend-and-break theorem, which roughly says that if a curve deforms nontrivially (one parameter family of curves) on a projective variety keeping a point fixed then it breaks into an effective 1-cycle with rational component. Here we assume that the base field $k$ is algebraically closed. 

> **Bend-and-Break I.**
> Let $X$ be a projective variety and let $f:C\to X $ be a smooth curve and $c\in C$ a point. If  $dim_{[f]}Mor(C,X;f\mid_{\{c\}})\ge 1$ then there is rational curve in $X$ passing through the point $f(c)$.

> **Proof.**
> Let $T$ be the normalization of a 1-dimensional irreducible subvariety of $Mor_{[f]}(C,X;f\mid_{c})$ passing through $[f]$ and $\overline{T}$ be the smooth compactification of $T.$ The morphism $T\to Mor(C,X;f\mid_{c})$ induces a morphism $T\times C\to X$ and a rational map $ev: \overline{T}\times C \dashrightarrow X.$ We can blow up the points of indeterminacy of $ev$ to obtain a smooth surface $S$ (to get this take the graph of the rational map from which we have a birational morphism onto $C\times \overline{T}$ and then take a smooth model of the graph) such that the composition $e: S \xrightarrow{\epsilon}  {C\times \overline{T}}  \overset{ev}{\dashrightarrow}  X$ is a morphism. Note that the birational morphism from $S$ onto $C\times \overline{T}$ is a composition of finitely many monoidal transformations. Now we show that $ev$ is not defined at every point of $\lbrace c\rbrace \times \overline{T}$. Let us assume the contrary that $ev$ is defined on all of $\lbrace c\rbrace \times \overline{T}$. Then there exists an open neighbourhood $U$ of $c$ such that $ev$ is defined on $U\times  \overline{T}$. To see this for each point $(c,t)$ take an open neighbourhood $U_t\times V_t$ over which $ev$ is defined. Since $\overline{T}$ is compact there is a finite subcover of $\lbrace c\rbrace \times \overline{T}$ by neighbourhoods of this type. Take the intersection of the finitely many $U_t'$s appearing in the subcover and this is the desired open neighbourhood $U.$ Then we have two morphisms $ev:U\times \overline{T}\to X$ and $p:U\times \overline{T}\to U$ (projection). Since $ev$ contracts the fiber $p^{-1}(c)$, by rigidity lemma there is an open subset $V$ of $U$ containing $c$ such that there exists a factorisation $ev\mid_{V\times \overline{T}}:V\times \overline{T}\xrightarrow{p_1} V\xrightarrow{g} X.$ Now the morphism $g$ must be equal to $f\mid_{V}.$ Since $ev$ and $f\circ p_1$ agree on the dense open subset $V\times T$, hence they agree on all of $C\times T.$ This means that the subvariety $T$ of $Mor(C,X;f\mid_{c})$ is only a point $[f]$, which is a contradiction.
>
> 
> So there exists a point $(c,t_0)\in \lbrace c\rbrace \times \overline{T}$ at which $ev$ is not defined. The fiber of $t_0$ under the projection $S\to \overline{T}$ consists of the strict transform of $C\times \lbrace t_0\rbrace$ and a rational 1-cycle $E$ and which meets the strict transform $\lbrace c\rbrace \times \overline{T}$ (since $ev$ is not defined at $(c,t_0)$, the birational morphism $\epsilon$ is not an isomorphism at $(c,t_0)$; hence the fiber of the point $(c,t_0)$ must contain exceptional curves). Also by Zariski's main theorem, the fiber of $(c,t_0)$ by the morphism $\epsilon$, which is again a rational 1-cycle (sum of some of the exceptional curves of the 1-cycle $E$), is connected. This fiber cannot be entirely contracted to a point by $e$ because otherwise by applying rigidity lemma we can find an open subset $W$ of $(c,t_0)$ over which $ev\mid_{\epsilon^{-1}(W)}:\epsilon^{-1}(W)\xrightarrow{\epsilon} W\xrightarrow{h} X$. But $ev\mid_{W}$ is a morphism for which such a factorisation exists. Thus $h$ and $ev$ agree on an open  subset of $W$ because locally we can invert $\epsilon$ and so we can define $ev$ at the point $(c,t_0)$, a contradiction. Since the strict transform $\lbrace c\rbrace \times \overline{T}$ is contracted to the point $f(c)$ by $e,$ the rational 1-cycle $e_ *E$ passes through $f(c)$.



>**Bend-and-Break II.**
> Let $X$ be a projetive variety and $g_0:\mathbb{P}^1\to X$ a curve. Assume that there is a smooth connected pointed curve $0_D\in D$ and a morphism $G:\mathbb{P}^1\times D\to X$ such that
>1. $G\mid{\mathbb{P}^1\times \lbrace 0_D\rbrace}=g_0$
>2. $G(\lbrace 0\rbrace\times D)=g_0(0)$, $G(\lbrace \infty \rbrace\times D)=g_0( \infty )$ and
>3. $G(\mathbb{P}^1\times D)$ is a surface.
> Then $(g_0)_ *(\mathbb{P}^1)$ is algebraically equivalent on X to either a reducible curve or a multiple curve.

>**Proof.**
>Let $\overline{D}$ be the smooth compactification of $D$ and $q:S\to \overline{D}$ a $\mathbb{P}^1$-bundle which contains the open subset $\mathbb{P}^1\times D$ such that $q$ is compatible with the second projection morphism $\mathbb{P}^1\times D\to D$ (we can take $S=\mathbb{P}^1\times \overline{D}$). Let $\overline{G}:S\dashrightarrow X$ be the rational map extending $G.$ Let $\tilde{r}:\tilde{S}\to S$ be a composition of blow-ups such that the induced map $\tilde{G}:\tilde{S}\to X$ is a morphism (same construction as in the proof of the theorem above). We prove the lemma by induction on the number of blow-ups in $\tilde{r}.$
>
>First we treat the case when $\overline{G}$ is a morphism. Let us fix an ample divisor $H$ on X. Let $C_0$ and $C_\infty$ be two sections of $q:S\to \overline{D}$ extending $\lbrace 0\rbrace \times D$ and $\lbrace \infty \rbrace \times D$ respectively (Take $\lbrace 0\rbrace \times \overline{D}$ and $\lbrace \infty\rbrace \times \overline{D}$). Then $\overline{G}^ *H$ is ample, so $(\overline{G}^ *H)^2>0$ and $\overline{G}^ *(H)$ and $\overline{G}^ *H.C_0=\overline{G}^ *(H).C_{\infty}=0.$ Then by Hodge index theorem $(C_0)^2<0$ and $(C_{\infty})^2< 0$ and so $\overline{G}^ *H,C_0,C_\infty$ are lineraly independent elements of the Neron-Sevari group of $X.$  







